# Salvage City

**Note:** This document includes selected excerpts from a larger onoing research project. It was compiled as a reference for artist Marian Glebes as she developed an installation artwork for the BMA exhibition on Home in August 2015.

Throughout this same period, some property-owners took another approach by not simply vacating a house but demolishing it. The same materials that might have been stolen if a house was abandoned and perhaps even the same laborers were employed in the salvage and destruction of countless early brick and frame residential buildings in the 19th century. Typically when a residential property was torn down in this period the plan was to replace the property with something different – a warehouse, a factory, a road – reflecting the changing functions of downtown during the mid and late 19th century. The land had become more valuable than the property located on top of it.
 
In most cases, the demolition likely went unremarked but in others, particularly in the case of the oldest home’s that some already considered as historic properties, it prompted interest and even regret. In some cases, the monetary value of salvaged materials was matched by the cultural value of a memory or a memento that spoke to the history of the demolition house – something that helped to tell the building’s story.

These examples extend the idea of the vacant house as a resource - one that has lost value to its owners - by giving examples where the vacant house has new kinds of values instead of just financial. Values related to nationalist and local identities and the role of individual and community memory that drove the formal growth of preservation in Baltimore a century later.
 
In May 1847, the National Intelligencer on the rare demolition that was "deemed worthy of notice" in a 118-year-old city:
 
> ”that workmen are now engaged tearing down the very oldest house in Baltimore; to erect in its stead an elegant new warehouse. This venerable building, situate at the corner of South Calvert and Mercer streets, which has weathered the storms of more than one hundred winters, has connected with it some interesting reminiscences... Daguerreotype sketches and other drawings were taken of it, to preserve as relics, prior to its demolition."
 
In July 1878, workmen demolishing three homes on Pratt Street recovered relics and artifacts that testified to more than a century of history at the house:
 
> ”Workmen have begun tearing down three buildings on the south-east corner of Pratt and Albemarle streets, which, it is believed, date back in their erection to the latter part of the last century...Behind the mantel bricks were found several old English coins, bearing date of 1772, in the reign of George III, which were current here in colonial times. Besides the coins were found a gold pen and lead pencils of no recent date...The new buildings will have pressed brick fronts, and many modern improvements which would have astounded the generation that lived when the foundations of the old structures were lain."

In the case of Tusculum, locals gathered at the scene of a demolition to observe the passing of a much-loved local landmark and take a fragment of the structure as a memento. An early suburban mansion, by January 1891, Tusculum had been buildings. The front door faced on Bank Lane which had been converted to alley around 60 years before:
 
> ”’Gwynn's Folly,' the quaint but pretentious little building of classic architecture which stood for years in Bank lane, between St. Paul and Calvert streets, has disappeared before the march of modern improvement, and nothing now marks the spot where it stood but a pile of rubbish and the five stately elms that for nearly a century had guarded it... The ancient edifice had a warm place in the hearts of many a white-haired Baltimoreans, and pieces of its mantel-pieces and bits of its woodwork were eagerly gathered up for souvenirs. …
> About 1830 the improvements of the neighborhood shut in and hid the 'Tusculum' and converted Bank lane into an alley. ...For a number of years past a family of colored people have made the noted Tusculum their home."

Other mementoes could be gruesome. This example from 1903 also illustrates a rising interest in memorializing buildings within the context of the site:
> “Portions of two skeletons were found yesterday in the attic of an old building at the southeast corner of Charles and Balderston streets, which is now being razed to make way for a modern structure to be erected on the site for Mr. George Norbury Mackenzie. Just how the skeletons go there no one seems to know, but Mr. Mackenzie said yesterday that their discovery caused a slight panic among the negro laborers who were at work pulling down the old building... He said the negroes would not touch the bones, which were thrown among a pile of debris. Mr. McKenzie said he believes the old house was a center during the riots of July 27-28, 1812, which culminated in the killing of Gen. James M. Lingan... The old structure was built about 1730, and Mr. Mackenzie intends to commemorate the old building by erecting a tablet with the inscription ‘1730-1903.’”

In late June 1913, another vacant building on Aisquith Street, once home to James McHenry, fell after the property received a condemnation notice:
 
> “Down on Aisquith street, near Lexington, stands a sadly dilapidated little six-room house that is soon to be torn down--unless a high wind razes it before the wrecks arrive--and of the hundreds of persons who pass it daily perhaps not one knows that it was once the property of James McHenry, the famous Baltimorean for whom Fort McHenry was named.
> This little house, No. 134, stands as it has stood for more than a century, looking upon original Baltimore town. But it has reached its last days. Rats infest its garret, its living rooms and its cellar; its small-paned windows are broken, its floors sag and it lists menacingly to starboard, while the rains beat in through its gaping weatherboarding and the shingle roof.
> James Young, president of the Oak Lawn Cemetery Company, is the present owner of the property. The Building Inspector has already given orders that the house must be razed and this will be accomplished within a few days. Then one of Baltimore's oldest landmarks will give place to an ultra modern billboard, that will fill the gap in the block of houses.
> For several years the little house has been vacant--except for the rats--and its floors have accumulated a thick layer of dust and fallen plaster. Back in 1906 its first floor was occupied by one Quong Wah, who conducted a modest Chinese laundry. An aged woman lived above. But even then the house was beyond hope, and when, one afternoon, Quong Wah fell through the floor of the room over the kitchen into his washtub below, he became discouraged and moved out.”

In July 1967, the Sun reported on how Mrs. Dorothy Quick and Donald Michael of Radnor Road, "acquired part of an iron fence that bordered the House of the Good Shepherd at Mount and Hollins streets for more than a century,” and incorporated the fence into their garden. The pair were some of 
 
> ”A suburban couple has a patio made of marble from the floor of the old National Union Bank, which used to front on Fayette street just east of Charles and was one of the buildings to survive the Baltimore Fire of 1904.
> Leory Kirby, a builder who laughingly calls himself a 'collector of everything,' has salvaged and used items from hexagonal paving blocks to old shutters. He acquired several dozen narrow interior shutters of cypress from the College of Notre Dame during a remodeling project four years ago. He had them cleaned of more than a dozen coats of paint applied over an estimated 110 years and converted them into walls paneling for his office. […]
> Mr. and Mrs. George Healey of Wiltondale, salvaged an old decorative marble railing from a St. Paul street townhouse that was being razed. 'We saw a man removing one from a balcony nearby,' said Mrs. Healey, 'and we bought ours from the wrecker for $15. It stands on the fringe of our patio.'
> The Department of Public Works, however, now prefers that the public deal directly with contractors doing demolition work, since wrecking companies base their bids on the estimated value of materials and items that may be salvaged. Wreckers deal with collectors in a variety of manners. Some post signs outside buildings to be razed, inviting persons to come in and make an offer on anything that appeals to them. Others advertise that a property is to be razed and collectors are free to browse. Still others remove everything of value then sell items from a central warehouse. A number of wrecking companies report that they usually have one an on the job, generally the foreman who is empowered to sell items to the public."39
 

While demolition transformed several neighborhoods in the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s, in other areas the city abandoned plans for large-scale clearance after community activists successfully fought off plans for highway development. One unexpected legacy was a large number of vacant houses now owned by the city.
 
In response, the city began to explore a variety of rehabilitation strategies, including the “scattered site” rehabilitation program (the “Vacant House Program”) converting vacant rowhouses into public housing. The well-known “dollar house” program first attempted on Stirling Street near Old Town Mall and later explored with greater success in South Baltimore and Barre Circle.
 
The city’s approach built on a new passion for rehabilitation in 1960s and 1970s. Similar to the renovation of Bolton Hill in the late 1930s, the rehab efforts in Federal Hill and Fell’s Point drew on materials salvaged from vacant and distressed rowhouses as an essential material resource. In 1974, the Baltimore Sun profiled preservationist Jane Springer under the headline, “Transformed - a 14 foot wide rowhouse.” Springer volunteered as a member of the Preservation Society board of directors and used architectural elements from vacant buildings to rehabilitate an 1802 Federal Hill rowhouse on Montgomery Street. She remarked to the Baltimore Sun:
 
> ”I didn't want to use new materials in renovating an old house," said Mrs. Springer. "I got permission from the Commission for Historical and Architectural Preservation at City Hall to remove from vacant houses owned by the city pieces of old wood, the stairway; the large-paned mullioned windows (on the second and third floor rear) from an abandoned plant and the iron balustrade across the front exterior. The commission stipulates that such materials be used only for renovations in a restoration area; they cannot be bought for re-sale. The expense involved is in the removal and hauling."
 
For most, however, vacant houses served as a threat instead of an asset. When Robert C. Embry remarked that same year [1974], “There is nothing like a boarded-up house to pull down a whole block,” the Sun called it a “truism echoed by landlords and residents.”
 
In 1975, the efforts of a group of similar home rehabbers contributed to the establishment of the Baltimore Salvage Depot, an enterprise touted in 1981 as “the country's first center for recycling urban architectural artifacts.” Supported in part by federal workforce training grants, the depot offered a wide range of products at a Pratt Street warehouse in the early 1980s:
 
> “A pair of Olympic torches from the old Oriole Park on 29th street, oak doors from St. Mary's Seminary, and stained glass windows from an East Baltimore rowhouse--it's all gathered in the dark and dingy five-story warehouse at 213 West Pratt street.
 
> The sign out front reads "The Baltimore Salvage Depot," a distinctly unpretentious title for an operation described as the country's first center for recycling urban architectural artifacts… Now in its sixth year, the Salvage Depot was established to recycle items taken from condemned city-owned houses and buildings. The idea began when homesteaders, seeing salvageable sections of houses being buried under the rubble or a wrecker's ball, used to go scrounging in vacant houses after the wrecking crew quit for the day. This practice was not only hazardous, but illegal. For once the property was turned over to the wreckers, it was privately owned.
 
> The city's Commission on Historical and Architectural Preservation agreed with the renovators' idea that the beauty of old buildings should be salvaged when possible. At its grand opening, the line of customers ran out the door and down the block. The depot took in more than $4,000… Not all items offered are stored at the Pratt street warehouse. "Ask for Marble Steps," a sign advises visitors. "We don't store the steps here. They are stored at Druid Hill Park. Persons interested can make an appointment to go look at them."”

In April 1931, the Sun reported under the headline Ask Mementoes Of Homes Condemned For New School: Residents, Forced To Move Away From Patterson Park To Provide Building Site, Want Steps, Electric Fixtures, Furnaces And Other Keepsakes:
> “Although residents of Ellwood avenue and Robinson street, adjacent to Patterson Park, must relinquish their homes to make way for the new high school to be erected on the block, some of them have petitioned the Public Improvement Commission for permission to remove mementoes for the houses, it was revealed yesterday, Some of these have been purchased by the commission and condemnation proceedings will be instituted against others.
> One resident who has sold his some wants to take the front steps with him. He and his family for years have sat on these steps on summer evenings and watched automobiles passing through the park, children frolicking on the playgrounds and occasional pyrotechnic shows. 
> Another former home owner has asked permission to take electric fixtures which have illuminated many a gay party, and for which he has a sentimental attachment.
> Another, after feeding his furnace each winter morning and banking it at night for many years wants to take it to this new home. Whether he intends to set it up again or keep it as a souvenir he did not say. Herbert J. Limbach, supervising Engineer for the commission, said it is not within his province to grant such requests.
> The usual custom he explained, is to engage a salvage company to wreck the buildings. The former owners usually negotiate with the salvage concern for whatever they wish to remove.”

In May 1939, home renovators on Bolton Street with salvaged material - May 1939
 
Rehabilitation on the 1200 block on Bolton Street used material from homes demolished for the construction of either Armory Plaza or McCulloh Homes [Additional research is required here]:
 
> ”Five years ago it had gone to pot. One or two families had clung persistently to their homes, but most of the owners had fled before the encroachment of undesirables who had begun to filter in. The razing of the 1100 block to make room for the Armory Plaza was a green light for speculators, who bought up property in the block right and left for occupancy by tenants forced out of the houses which were being torn down. Many of them moved in and proved to be so objectionable that an older resident, impoverished but respectable, immediately moved out in order to go to a better neighborhood. His house, left vacant, immediately was wrecked by vandals, who tore doors from their hinges and carried them off, pulled the gas and electric fixtures from the walls and ceilings and made off with part of the railings on the front steps."
> ”To reestablish it and replace doors and door frames which had disappeared or were in bad condition the renovators doubled as camp followers of wrecking crews all over the city, picking up doors here, grillwork there, window sash some place else. Any place where it became known that old Baltimore houses were being torn down some resident or future resident of the 1200 block on Bolton street appeared, bent on salvage."
